many books including a just published
two major work with Noam Chomsky called
manufacturing descent manufacturing
consent excuse me
terror Network a response to Claire
sterling and many other books and he's a
director of our Institute
Jane hunter on my left is the editor of
Israeli Foreign Affairs and the author
of many books and articles about
Israel's role not only in the Middle
East but in Central America and in
southern Africa I highly commend Israeli
Foreign Affairs to you the information
for ordering it and subscribing to it
are also available in the literature
area it's one of the best publications
available in this country to find out
information about the Middle East which
is very very difficult to come by
otherwise and our third speaker is John
Stockwell at the left of the table John
was a CIA case officer for some 13 years
and spent much time in Congo in Vietnam
and in Angola where he was the chief for
the CIA of the task force on Angola he
also when he left the CIA wrote a very
important book called in search of
enemies and recently John is one of the
founders of an organization called the
Association for Responsible descent or
artists made up of a group of experts in
national security matters former CIA
officers former FBI officers and open I
believe to members of the general public
who are interested in supporting those
work and those studies we will now begin
I'll turn the floor over to Edward
Herman
Thank You Belle and thank you oh this
information originally meant secretly
planted false evidence designed to
deceive some target audience it's
gradually been extended in meaning to
include open as well as soap Subrosa
deception although some people continue
to use the older meaning one reason for
moving to this broader concept of this
information is that open deception is
more important than the covert variety
in both quantity and effect on the
domestic market and the home population
is the primary target of disinformation
campaigns this information would not be
an important factor in the flow of new
of domestic news if the mass media
served their self-proclaimed role of
watchdog protecting the public from
abuses by the powerful deliberate lies
would be fir that out quickly
Corrections would be prominent and the
powerful would be shown that lying does
not pay but the the real world is quite
different the mass media are part of the
power structure and their occasional
vigorous efforts as watchdog usually
occur when the meet the a lead itself is
divided and engaging in some kinds of
mutual recrimination as in in the the
famous watergate case when the elite is
in agreement the watchdogs are usually
silent in the face of disinformation
that advances consensus ends mass media
leaders usually enthusiastically support
national policy which makes them very
reluctant to challenge convenient lies
and myths the government has also
mastered the art of news management's
timing news releases near deadlines
surrounding them with hoopla and
stifling internal dissent in favor of a
uniform line thereby reducing
journalists ability to raise doubts
about hot news furthermore the
government and its allies have stepped
up their in
dating tactics on journalists and on
media organizations making challenges to
government claims more costly most
notable has been the development of
flack machines which are right-wing
organizations that attack and threaten
the media who depart from the party line
the result of all this is that when the
government uses disinformation the mass
media very often pass it along without
question even if it's extremely
implausible they then failed to
investigate aggressively to check out
its truth or falsity and when it's
dissing forming character is finally
disclosed often by the dissident press
or by parties unconnected with the media
the Corrections are on the back pages
and very low-keyed the net result is
that disinformation pays even if it's
quickly proven to be alive when the
Reagan administration accused the Soviet
Union of deliberately shooting down
Korean airliner
0:07 in September 1983 the media jumped
on the bandwagon with enthusiasm on the
government's say-so
and then they simply refused to
investigate when the government's claim
was eventually shown to be a knowing lie
the new information was treated very
matter-of-factly without any reflections
on the episode as a propaganda campaign
based on disinformation and gullibility
the New York Times finally had an
editorial on the subject which blamed
the government but didn't didn't say
anything about the New York Times his
own responsibility but the government
lie would not have been effective
without the New York Times gullibility
and its lack of investigative zeal and
then a tiny and muted correction an even
more illuminating illustration of media
collaboration and a disinformation
operation occurred when the
administration justified its bombing of
Libya by the claim that Libya had been
responsible for the bombing of a
discotheque in West Germany in an in an
editorial at that time on April 15 1986
the time said that this was perfectly
good thing to do
because the government said it had
irrefutable proof of Libyan involvement
the times didn't insist on seeing this
proof although the government had
claimed irrefutable proof of the Libyan
hit squad of 1981 which did not exist
subsequently The Times reported new
government suggestions that the Syrians
were involved in the discotheque bombing
but the New York Times simply reported
this these new suggestions of Syrian
involvement without saying my goodness
maybe we better go back and look at the
allegations that the Libyans were
involved or in reconciling this the the
Syrian and Libyan involving so even at
that point that paper still failed to
insist on evidence or attempt any kind
of reconciliation of these conflicting
claims it is on the basis of patriotic
gullibility like this that the
systematic use of disinformation is
built let me discuss very briefly three
cases involving Central Americans this
information is very important in
supporting US policy there because the
gap between our nominal and real ends is
enormous the government therefore
systematically engages in the practice
of transference or projections
attributing to its victims something
approximating our it's own actions and
policies one case was the
administration's allegation that the
Sandinistas openly proclaimed a quote
revolution without frontiers unquote
this was based on a speech by tomas
vergis in which he said that i the
that the idea the idea he said of
progressive change stimulated by the the
Nicaraguan experiment was if effecting a
revolution without frontiers the
administration used this to prove that
the sunt the Sandinistas intent to
invade its neighbors by using the phrase
revolution without frontiers in in
isolation from the very clear statement
of its true meaning this piece of this
disinformation transferred to Nicaragua
in intention what the United States and
its surrogates were doing in reality in
an incessant cross-border attacks which
did constitute a genuine
counter-revolution without frontiers the
media at first treated this point of
administration disinformation quote
objectively passing it along as news
eventually it was reported in muted
fashion that some questions had been
raised about the authenticity of the
Borg is quote no conclusions were drawn
there was of course no discussion of the
Orwellian character of the
administration claim in the first place
the disinformation served its purpose
the mythical claim was stated loudly and
frequently and it's still used the the
admission of possible error was needed
and no retrospectives were offered a
more complex case of transference in
disinformation is the u.s. sponsorship
of elections in El Salvador as an
expression of devotion to democracy in
fact the purpose of the Salvadoran
elections of 1982 and 1984 was to
provide a democratic facade to induce
Congress to provide money to continue a
proxy war to defeat democratic forces
and preserve elite and army rule this
required a literal structure of this
information on us purposes on the role
of the military on the intended
exclusion of the guerrillas and their
supporters and on the underlying
conditions that bear on a free elections
for example the guerrillas and FDR had
to be portrayed as opposing democracy in
their refusal to participate in the
election and not as a quote main
opposition unquote excluded by plan and
by threat of death in Nicaragua the US
government agenda was reversed the
Contras were seeking democracy and
Arturo Cruz represented a main
opposition by US government yet in an
amazing fever the US media amassed media
allowed this structure of disinformation
on the Salvadoran and Nicaraguan
elections to prevail
El Salvador is a fledgling democracy
whereas Nicaragua which had a freer and
fairer election and a government that
does not murder civilians on a routine
basis has an unelected government a
final case that I think is quite
illuminating involves the media coverage
of the murder of Herbert Anaya in El
Salvador this is a fairly complex case
that I discussed in detail and the
forthcoming issue of covert action
information button the essentials are
this Anaya was head of the human rights
organization rights organization in El
Salvador which had already suffered
eight murders at the hands of the Army
and paramilitary right and Anaya was
surely murdered by these same forces
which had been harassing him and which
had been apprehended arresting his
associates and engaging in surveillance
over and he was attacking them so
there's that there's no question and
there's no question by any people really
in El Salvador that he was murdered by
the same forces that had murdered his
eight predecessors but a few weeks after
the murder Duarte and company brought
forth a young student named Miranda who
had been illegally held by the police
for 12 days and eventually confessed to
murdering Anaya under orders of the
rebels he was paraded before televisions
and before the foreign journalists but
he was given two thousand four hundred
dollars in cash and was soon released
having committed this murder following
his release immediately following his
release he declared that his confession
was untrue as had been a result of
torture and as a matter of fact and
there was a previous case exactly
analogous to this in 1983 when another
student in Alvarado
had been arrested and had under torture
confessed then as soon as Alvarado was
released he said that he'd been tortured
and in fact the FBI had examined the
Alvarado case since he did murder
they're involved an American and
therefore the FBI came in and said that
Alvarado couldn't have done it but
so that it was a rerun of a pattern in
fact it was Alvarado - they put him
before TV and they had the journalists
in to have him confess after
incarceration so we had a rerun
but James Lemoine and the New York Times
took the Miranda confession seriously
with two articles featuring the
confession framing it to put the the
blame on the rebels stressing that the
allegation was the rebels had done it
and giving it credibility although very
cautiously suggesting that the proof was
not all in the articles were a travesty
of honest reporting that had never
mentioned the Alvarado case and they
never mentioned the threats to an ayah
previously and the harassment of Anaya
prior to his to his murder and the thing
was full of items that violated simple
media objectivity when Miranda confessed
upon his release the recantation was
given by the New York Times on a very
terse back page article in an AP release
in short this small disinformation
program carried out by the Duarte
government while not effective in El
Salvador at all was almost surely
successful in its impact on the audience
of the New York Times because the New
York Times played dumb and they allowed
this point of this information to be
given reasonable publicity I think this
is a very important case because you
have something where where they don't
literally they didn't literally lie this
was a form of disinformation in in which
the DEXA Duarte government lied but the
the crucial thing here is to see how the
New York Times claimed on they they
stripped all the context out of the
picture and they they themselves didn't
lie they just presented the material in
such a way that that more readers of The
Times would think that this was true
then would have seen that little
recantation and of course no important
important thing is that there
no follow-ups and no discussions of what
this all meant and the pattern of
activity in El Salvador and the meaning
of the Duarte government so I would
conclude by saying that opened this
information opened this information
which is now really the most important
kind of disinformation depends
critically on them on the media playing
Dhamma this is a collective effort
disinformation the government now knows
that if it makes an implausible claim
about Nicaragua or Libya the mass media
will take it at face value even if it's
implausible even if the government had
told a lie about the same subject or
country a week before so Syria lying
becomes possible because there's no
correction and rectification and putting
this all in a context of a serial
pattern the corrections and
qualifications if they come at all will
be on the back pages in low-key
disinformation works the watchdog
doesn't bark
it swallows toads and then it whimpers
thank you
thank you there's there's a very
interesting point about the last item
had mentioned in a new book by Mark
Hertz garden called on bended knee the
the press and the Reagan administration
where he talks about what ed just
mentioned and calls it the attribution
excuse whereby the major media will say
we didn't say that Thomas bore hay was a
cocaine dealer we said that President
Reagan said that Thomas bore hay was a
cocaine dealer and you'll see so many
stories that begin today the president
said dumped it on to them to dump to
them and never is another paragraph
saying however all of us journalists
looked at each other and said that's a
crock that's never in there they just
say today the president said and that in
fact one of the journalists who was
interviewed said he thought the most
important thing that should be taught in
journalism schools are in high schools
is the concept of attribution it's very
important because the average reader
doesn't quite understand who it is
that's saying what and that's precisely
what Ed was talking about now I would
like to turn the floor over to Jane
hunter
thank you very much and I guess I want
to start by saying how what tremendously
honored I am to be part of what I hope
is the first step forward of a much
accelerated move by all of us in this
new Bush era looking at the Middle East
which is a vast area and what kind of
stories come out of it would be an
impossible task in the 15 minutes that I
have to talk and so instead what I'd
like to do is to just highlight some of
the more important myths lies and
shibboleths that are prevalent in the
media particularly around Israel why
focus on Israel as opposed to why any of
the Arab governments and particularly
some of the wealthier more backward Arab
governments well very simply because
this country is the prime economic and
political backer of Israel and so what
Israel does is in a sense as important
and is relevant to all of us here as
what our own government does in terms of
our being responsible for confronting
opposing and trying to stop it perhaps
the greatest lie misunderstanding
misconception around the coverage of
Israel to be actively supported not only
just parroted but actively supported by
almost all of the mainstream media is
the notion of the uniqueness of the
Holocaust and by Holocaust is commonly
meant the killing of six million Jews by
the Nazis during the
late 30s in the 40s there is absolutely
no way here that I'm denying that that
took place indeed it did took place and
it was an extremely heinous crime on the
other hand by the way that it has now
passed down to the next generation
meaning my children when they were in
school and your children very shortly
our grandchildren what we hear about is
simply the killing of Jews because of
anti-semitism this takes it out of the
larger context of fascism of the whole
idea of an authoritarian corporatist
state of the whole idea of a regime that
will differentiate dehumanize and then
proceeded on to genocide or to mass
murder or to cultural obliteration or to
political liquidation of another people
all of which are phenomena which have
not only survived world war two but has
been actively supported in very many
ways by our own government in its
alliances and in its covert activities
but are also supported and perpetrated
very directly by the government of
Israel which in itself assigned role as
the spokesperson for an expression of
the Jewish people has inherited the
mantle of victim of the Holocaust what
does this mantle mean means essentially
that he who wears it is allowed to do
anything this finds expression within
all segments of the Israeli body politic
most particularly on the right as being
the notion that nobody stepped forward
to save the Jews in World War two this
is of course true
for many of these same dynamics are on
account of many of the same dynamics
that operate in our society today and
allowed not only the Republican for the
Democratic candidate to wage a racist
campaign in the election that was just
past that since nobody did come forward
to stop Hitler to support the Jews to
defend the Jews the lesson to be drawn
from that is that nobody will ever
defend the Jews and therefore the Jews
must defend themselves and that
therefore and when I'm saying the Jews
I'm saying this to paraphrase the
Israeli position and of course what
their meaning is not the Jews but the
government of Israel and that therefore
anything that the government of Israel
does in its own self-defense which is by
its very nature a very pre-emptive
affair is completely justified thus
Israel having a nuclear arsenal is
completely justified Israel which has
probably launched more cross-border
attacks in the past ten years than any
other country in the world even this one
is yet the possessor of the world's
sixth largest nuclear arsenal it's
therefore quite alright for Israel to
arm the apartheid regime of South Africa
and to share its nuclear weapons
technology with South Africa because in
a pinch if by the United States decides
to no longer support Israel so the
Israeli argument goes or the
justification for this goes well then
the South Africans would be a good
fallback position and likewise it's fine
to send the graduates of the Israeli
military system around the world to
repressive countries to help on such
things as the forced resettlement
so-called pacification program in
Guatemala and the
after having helped with the genocide
Allah tack of the government in the late
70s and early 80s against the indigenous
Mayan people of that country and to into
many other countries it also justifies
what one if one reads the Israeli press
sees more and more over the past few
years which is this notion of a Moloch
which is a tribe in the Bible which
apparently transgressed so fearsomely
that Moloch was slated for the full
measure of retaliation ie annihilation
ie genocide it's used as a synonym as a
very well understood metaphor for the
Palestinian people these are all
concepts the concepts which flow from
the notion that the Holocaust was simply
an attack on the Jews and that World War
two had nothing to do with the rise of
fascism and this of course very ably
allows one to look at World War two for
children and even for the adult mass
media consuming audience without and
addressing the very interesting question
of how did we emerge from having fought
the axis and then having built up and
made alliances with these very countries
and watched immediately into the Cold
War it lets us off the hook of having to
look at the fascists in our own society
and allows anti-communism instead to
prevail as far as from the Israeli point
of view this is very convenient because
this also helps to buttress the next
major concept to come out of the Middle
East and make its way into our press and
help with the pretty much down the line
blank minded support that is extended to
State of Israel and that's the notion of
the land without people for the people
without land which was perpetrated let
me read you something that was published
in something called the Palestine post
of 1938 and this is congressman Hamilton
fish at that point the first who had
supported the u.s. resolution in support
of the Balfour Declaration which was a
British paper declaring the right of the
Jewish people to a national homeland and
which was then mandatory mandatory
Palestine and fish is saying this is
when the British and 38 had decided to
was reverse that not to let Jews who
were fleeing Europe playing Hitler at
the time settle in Palestine fish in a
speech before Congress emphasized that
the Arabs had vast territories elsewhere
than in Palestine we now here's the same
argument which is put forth in the press
in two ways one way that there are 22
other Arab countries and why can't the
Palestinians go and live in them when
the Palestinian people of course make
the point that they have occupied the
contented territory Israel Palestine for
more consecutive years than the present
government of Israel which was just
declared in 1948 this again is going to
be something that's going to be in the
news in front of you because hopefully
this weekend's the Palestine National
Congress in Algiers is going to declare
a nation a government of by some sort or
other and this argument
be put forward the other argument that's
put forward is this whole idea of peace
and you notice that the word of peace is
always use Middle East peace process we
never hear the word justice and the idea
that peace can be achieved by somehow
making a deal with King Hussein to take
these people back under his rule as they
were under his rule until 1967 then we
also come to the notion and this has
been a very central notion in the past
eight almost nine years now of terrorism
and we're hearing that what at this
Palestine National Council meeting that
yes or Arafat is supposed to renounce
terrorism and this is just reported
blank we straight out by the press
without taking into account several
things one is our fight in something
called the Cairo declaration Yasser
Arafat the chair of the PLO in 1985
underscored the determination of the
Palestine Liberation Organization not to
carry armed struggle outside of the
contested territory meaning Israel and
the occupied West Bank in Gaza and his
held to this although he did threaten
after the assassination by Israel last
April which was carried out with among
other things an airborne command and
control center of the PLO is number two
officer kalila Wazir in Tunis that RF
I'd said that perhaps he might
reconsider it it was also something that
was brought up for reconsideration after
Israeli frogmen from Mossad Israel's
Secret Service bombed the ship of return
earlier in the year
although our fight and the PLO have got
to be portrayed as terrorists because
otherwise there would be almost no
reason for Israel not to treat with them
the whole notion of our fight as
terrorists not only before the US public
but also before the Israeli public was
very well exemplified in the
just-concluded Israeli electoral
campaign the government allowed the
Likud which was the winning party to put
a very big family tape of our effort on
did not allow the progressive list for
peace an Arab Jewish party to put an
interview with our fight on in which he
talks about the need to have an
international conference and to
recognize Israel likewise the whole idea
here that because Arafat is supposedly a
terrorist that the US government might
be able to bar him from coming at the
end of this month to speak to the UN is
going to be something that you're going
to be seeing and I hope everybody takes
a couple of minutes to complain to his
or her senator that this is not a very
proper position to take as the host
country to the UN is's be I would think
an urgent thing to do very soon there
are smaller canards that come out about
Israel but also make it difficult for
the US public to oppose the prevailing
bloc on any recognition in support of
the PLO by this government and one is
the idea of enduring Arab hostility to
Israel was there except for Syria which
hasn't even made many warlike moves and
their indications of cooperation between
Israel and Syria that have come on over
the last few months there are very few
countries in the Middle East that
wouldn't rather and have not signaled
their intention to live at peace with
Israel which after all is one of the
most powerfully armed countries in the
world
nonetheless what is coming into our
media now our stories about how Israel's
enemies are perfect preparing a nerve
gas war against Israel we saw this in
the very big coverage in the press the
last couple of months of how we Rock was
using poison gas against the Kurds this
was something that is still subject to
proof although I personally don't doubt
that gas has been used against the Kurds
I think the standard of proof was a lot
lower than the standard of proof that
has been required for such events and
say the Israeli use of tear gas produced
in the United States shot into
Palestinian dwellings that has not only
killed many people but has also produced
a great number of miscarriages
interestingly enough with all that we
hear about the idea of a nerve gas
attack on Israel by new generations of
surface-to-surface missiles an article
in September in defense and foreign
affairs said Israel has the most
sophisticated nerve gas program of all
in the Middle East and is begun to work
very intensively on it again this was
not even reported and I would just like
to close with going back to the more
narrow definition of this information
and talk about these stories that was
presented to us as a classic piece of
Soviet disinformation the idea that
babies are being sold in Latin America
and brought to the US to have their
organs removed to be used as donors for
white US babies well I happen to run
into that story yeah one of the issues
I've been covering in my newsletter has
been the Israeli purchase of babies for
adoption in Latin America one reason I
cover it is because it's the the
population the demographic issue in the
in Israel and the occupied territories
is a very important issues that the
Israelis are trying to multiply and they
can't get many Jews to go settle in
Israel from Western countries so
anything that brings large numbers of
people in is a trend to watch I watch
this trend I happen to get a clipping
from the Guatemalan press very early in
the year which talked about Israeli
couples buying babies that were perhaps
either bought by middlemen or taken from
mothers that didn't watch them remember
there were stories about babies being
stolen and I'll Salvador and so forth
and so on what all this comes out and at
the end of this very I would say
extremely anti-semitic and ignorant
Guatemalan article there is a story
essentially saying and we have heard
that perhaps these babies are taken and
used for their organ parts rather than
even adopted now it made its way around
as there was baby stealing in Brazil and
Paraguay and so forth and so on this
story made its way around I saw it next
in the Jerusalem Post is picked up by
Reuters and essentially aimed at the
fact that it was being done by people in
the US so I just think these things are
interesting they need watching they need
your skepticism but more than that
they happen in a vacuum and I think that
to a large extent we have been
responsible for that vacuum by not
vigorously challenging all of these
canards which once they come under
closer inspection it's very easy to
prove that they just don't fly at all
thank you very much
I I come here to this panel with great
excitement because it's so important the
subject of disinformation and
manipulation of the media and Bill asked
me to focus on Africa and there's a
logic in that because I've lived 15
years in Africa as a child but also six
years as a CIA operative and then in the
Angolan operation although I was in
Washington on the national security
council subcommittee supervising the
Angola secret war we were we were
running an operation in Angola and I
went in to check on things I would like
to clear the record and take take one of
my 15 minutes or two and point out that
my first book in search of enemies about
the Angolan operation I wrote it and
brought it out 10 years ago and and
there there may be some real continuing
Africanist in this audience and while I
try to keep up I've actually if you'll
permit me I've grown in other direction
since that time I've I've been for
example the the current covert operation
of most interest was in Nicaragua
Central America of greater interest or a
better vehicle if you will to
communicate to the people of the United
States about how these things are run
because they can understand and identify
with Nicaragua better than they can with
Angola so beginning in 81 I began to
travel to Central America I've given
over 400 lectures using Nicaragua as a
case study of covert action instead of
of Angola and then my thesis my readings
went on beyond the secret Wars of the
sea I to try to show how CI activities
reinforce or even provide the rationales
for things like the nuclear arms race
the works that I currently three works
that I currently have in progress for
example include a handbook a booklet
called racing on the new handbook of the
continuing a nuclear arms race and then
a book that excites me enormous Lee I
don't know if I'll be able to bring it
off it's the most complicated book I'll
ever tried to write co-authoring it with
my wife who is Vietnamese and she's
trying to capture the theme of a woman's
anger at having to make her life in the
shadow of men's wars as women have had
to do since the beginning of history and
my side of this story I'm trying to
capture oh the the theme of what makes
people like me like bud McFarlane who
was in my Marine Corps basic school
class tick and then what happened to
make me change whereas people like him
you know in fact did not change now
directly to this panel this subject this
wonderful conference I think what I can
bring most effectively to you is not to
try to analyze current events in Africa
our current hot disinformation stories
which we have by the stacks that are
being put out about Chester Crocker
magnificently organizing into the
salvation of Angola and a piece of court
and everything immediately before the
elections by the way with the South
Africans doing some bowing and nodding
to help make it look like it's going to
happen stuff like that
which you know week I could show you
clippings but I really think if you if
you if you'll permit me that it would be
more useful if I got into the mechanics
of how people inside the government
inside the CIA
mechanically work to get their
propaganda themes into the media mind
you my life totally unplanned but it led
me through a series of circumstances
where I was on the scene and then read
the New York Times you know what they
had to report about what was going on
there things like being up country in
Vietnam with the road the only road that
led to my post being cut regularly and
by VC forces
in this little village called Huck Hmong
where they would come up out of tunnels
in the ground and chop the road and then
disappear when they were
counter-attacked and and the World Press
reported one of these counter-attacks
about the South Vietnamese tanks going
in to liberate this little village in
swirling clouds of dust and you see the
trouble is the roads were paved moreover
it was the rainy season you know and
there was no dust and then i came out of
vietnam in the evacuation of april of 75
on a flight with all the other refugees
and spent some days in the tents in this
little city they set up on Clark Air
Force Base in Manila and the World Press
reported that we were living and you
know circumvent seas of mud and it
didn't rain one time during those days
you know we were there in Lublin Vichy
in 1967 CI mercenaries mutinying jean
SRAM had taken Bukavu and bob Dennard
invaded from angola and a magnificent
brilliant bluff terrorized the United
States made us think you know that the
Katanga was about to be chopped off
there was hysteria everywhere until we
found out there only sixteen of them and
they fled immediately someone you know
counter-attack
well a carload of journalists big-name
people from the big big news services
showed up driving up from Lusaka and
Zambia crossed the border into Lumumba
sheet and they went directly to the
American consulate and and to get
briefed on you know what's happening
really and where to go to look and I was
the briefing office there was the Consul
there so I knew exactly and then they
got their cut we told him it was over
that there were only 16 mercenaries and
they'd fled the country and so the
journalists piled in their cars and
drove back across the border and then
they file their stories and I got to
read what they wrote based on our
conversation which was unidentifiable
with anything that I had you know in
fact said but the most interesting
experience those are just coincidental
and the sloppiness of a thing if you
will are the responsibility to truth in
fact in detail
the major media's reporting in the
angolan operation though I had this job
on a subcommittee of the National
Security Council very much like the job
in which Oliver North got himself and
his president in his country and to so
much trouble in this job one we did it
by the book we didn't have an off the
shelf and that kind of madness we did
have one operative who definitely had
sticky fingers in Kinshasa but we didn't
have a deliberate diversion of funds to
someone like Richard Secord but we had
one third of my staff was professional
propagandists whose job was to try to
devise stories that would be plausible
and yet would work to advance our media
objectives our two major media
objectives were to focus one the obvious
one to focus the blames on the Cubans
and Soviets for what was happening in
Angola when in fact the simple
chronology of events as they were
responding to every one of our
initiatives we would go in with the
stage of escalation and they would try
to match it we would go in with another
step of escalation and again they would
try to match it until eventually because
we were lying to the public to the world
to the press to the Congress and they
were telling the truth about what they
were doing they were able to go in
overtly with 40,000 troops and blow my
24 advisers and Jonas Savimbi's forces
in this little South African force and
mercenary force we'd assembled a side
and wipe the Saudi and stop the thing
from that end of the line
the second objective of course of our
our media objective was to cover up our
illegal activity we had US advisors
inside the country and that was illegal
and we were lying to Congress about it
and so we had to cover that up to shield
them from journalists inquiries and
exposure we were dealing arms to South
Africa which was illegal and of course
we were very nervous about you know
about that
being brought out for example we were
delivering arms into Angola in large
quantities and once again we had to work
very hard to cover that up so it
wouldn't come out to establish paper
trails the journalists would get lost
trying to track the arms that we
actually were sending into Angola from
the United States now some of the
problems we got into I mind you I was in
a mental state to quit the CIA but I
wanted to see this operation through to
the end
by that time mentally I did not believe
in what we were doing I was taking notes
I had not thought about writing a book
at the time but I definitely expected
there would be a congressional
investigation and I was taking elaborate
detailed notes quotations exact verbatim
what people were saying and I was
protesting on occasion because my moral
being was was was was being resuscitated
at the time by my reaction to the
cynicism of what I've seen in Vietnam
and in this operation and so for example
I protested to my bosses about our
involvement with South Africa in Angola
we brought in South African troops to do
our fighting for us
and and my boss especially this Jim
Potts who was the chief of Africa
division he couldn't understand what my
argument was because the the best
fighting troops in in Africa south of
the Sahara are probably the the white
South African troops so to him it was a
very practical solution to bring these
troops in and I was trying to explain to
him how much you know the white South
African apartheid were hated and finally
he had you could see the light bulb Bing
you know go off so he put out actually a
cable to all the field stations
including the ones like in London for
example in Lusaka and Kinshasa and New
York where we had a base at the United
Nations advising people to watch out as
we frame stories and made statements and
influence people to speak out to be very
careful because as he put it blacks tend
to be irrational on this
objective South Africa we had another
little spin curve on this thing I ran
into I was protesting our use of
mercenaries now we had recruited four
little mercenary army units and put them
into Angola hiring whites to send them
into a black African country to kill
blacks as a technique of imposing our
policies on that country and since I had
grown up in the Congo where my cores in
the South African mercenaries had torn
the country apart working for the CIA I
had a sense of the horror of what these
people are moreover they're terrible
soldiers and I was trying to protest and
convey to mr. Potts
the pejorative sense that the word
mercenary connotes you know to the world
at large and he finally you know once
again the light bulb went off so he put
out another cable to all stations
involved saying because of the
pejorative connotation of the word
mercenary these people will hereafter be
called foreign military technicians and
so then when we were testifying to the
Congress and they asked if we had
anything to do with these mercenaries
that were showing up in Angola
straight-faced mr. Potts and Bill Colby
the CIA director said no and nobody
asked us if we had foreign military
technicians in Angola so you know that
was able to cover up the lies how do you
get stories into the major media if
you're sitting in the CIA now you have a
cooperative press at some levels but not
always cooperative and there's a lot of
tension and argument and contradictions
a Gulf oil
certainly has some influence in u.s.
Society and Boeing and they did not like
what we were doing and and so you're in
a sense in the CIA of being more
defensive than you people in this
audience would realize and you have to
find ways to get stories in you know
that that will work that the media will
buy that they won't turn them on you and
blow you out of the water instead Oh
sometimes it's not a hard sell we had
one journalist we flew over from Paris
who was working for us
travelling Africa for us and he brought
a hot story that made Holden Robert
to look like a good guy really
magnificent charismatic leader the
trouble is this story was written in
French and no one at the Washington Post
could you know translate it and so my
deputy went down and got the story and
set up all night with the translator
putting it in to good English and then
in the morning we gave it to the
journalist who took it back to the
Washington Post which paid him $2,600
for it another example of how we got
these stories out getting into really a
more elaborate structure but it's no
problem recruiting a journalist I'm
sorry some of them high integrity but
some of them you just go with a fistful
of money and they'll be quite happy you
know to help you with their stories or
sometimes without money just to do their
patriotic duty the problem is how do you
cover them to their bosses and their
colleagues so they will have an
explanation of how they're getting these
these miraculous miraculously getting
these stories out of the central part of
Angola you know you've got a journalist
in Paris how does he tell his boss he
got this story about a big battle down
in Angola and so we set up a structure
whereby it worked because of the
blessings of president Mobutu and
president Conda who told the editors of
the newspapers in their capitals to
cooperate with a unit of force and the
FNLA force just for starters then I put
writers covert covert action we call
them which inside the CI is what you
watch you used to talk about you know
propaganda but covert action branch
writers in Kinshasa and in Lusaka and
they would take vaguely accurate facts
geographically accurate otherwise facts
about the area and then weave stories
and then they would give them to the
FNLA in the unit two reps to print in
the local paper then we hired stringers
in each of these capitals
who would tell X the stories up to our
paid agent on on major news services in
the European capitals and these people
could then say my stringer down in
Lusaka just sent this hot story and the
story would come out you know Dateline
Lusaka for example or Dateline Kinshasa
now we still got into trouble on
occasion and then had great triumphs on
occasion the trouble is we had an over
overeager chief of station in Lusaka who
came up with what he thought was a
brilliant story he had the unit two
forces capturing the city of Milan GA
and capturing 40 Soviet advisors and see
what was brilliant about that that would
show that the Soviets were really behind
this whole thing well he didn't estimate
the interest the world.press would have
in having 40 Soviets captured by a black
liberation movement inside you know the
jungles of Angola if you will and so
suddenly these plane loads that
chartered plane loads of journalists
started descending on Silva Porto inside
Angola and and chasing down Savimbi who
hadn't been privy to what we were doing
and at that at that time we hadn't
taught him how to lie the CIA had since
taught him how to lie very effectively
and his answer to the journalists was I
don't know what you're talking about my
forces are bogged down 70 miles away
from Milan Jay I don't think we'll be
able to capture it and I don't think
there are any Soviets in this country
now you see the problem with that is
that it makes your paid agent up there
in Europe you know who planted this
story in the wire services sweat and
blood because he or she has to you know
get called in by the boss saying you
know where did you get this story you
know and what's the source of it so this
guy in Lusaka came up with an
alternative story which had Cuban
soldiers raping Angolan women now see
this was a safe cell because no editor
in the Western world is gonna challenge
it you know the dirty commies raping
African women God you know I'll run that
you know no questions asked so he kept
it going for weeks he had a battle was
fought he set up the battle and then he
had it reported and then that's the
Cuban troops were captured and then they
were identified by the victims and then
they were put on trial and then
eventually they were executed by the
women who allegedly had been raped and
we actually got into the world media
media photograph
of young african women girls if you will
15 year-olds who were holding these m16s
and supposedly shooting down these Cuban
rapists
now the Africans in that part of the
world I had grown up very nearby they
don't like to kill people and truth
because the ghosts will hang around and
haunt you so to get someone to serve on
a firing squad isn't easy and especially
the women you know don't like the
violence and would not serve on the
fight I mean there was nothing authentic
about this there had been no rape
whatsoever in fact our intelligence
showed that the Cubans had had conducted
themselves with extraordinary sense of
sensitivity to the needs of the Angolan
people and even Jonas Savimbi admitted
that at the time but and this is an
interesting point that I think has not
come out in this conference yet at least
I haven't heard it the truth still
eventually came out now this is what
Carl Taylor was getting into last night
except he had it exactly backwards he
said you know if we did such a bad job
why were the people still opposed to the
contra program well we were opposed to
it because we saw through the lies
because so many people went to Nicaragua
and saw the truth and eventually
everybody working so hard through the
alternative press we prevailed over the
New York Times and managed to
communicate to 70% of the people in this
country that what was happening in
Nicaragua was wrong in the angolan thing
despite our manipulations and an
essentially sympathetic press in July of
75 Tanzania was completely supportive of
our side to the point of offering
training camps for the FNLA forces and
Kenyatta made speeches supporting our
line and Idi Amin who was the head of
the OAU made speeches supporting our
line at that's at that time but by
January of 76 six months later 43 of the
45 states of the OAU
voted overwhelmingly to condemn our
program because the truth had come out
that South Africa was involved and that
the CI was involved
and that the CIA was funding the
mercenaries who were who were killing
people inside Angola so the truth
eventually prevailed and the program was
in fact eventually shut down I like to
close on that because sometimes we get
so frustrated when we see a George Bush
Teflon eyes and slipped into office when
he's a practicing criminal that we get
discouraged but we can win victories in
this world despite the way the media is
stacked against us and and and so keep
up the good work and it has I'll try to
do
before we take questions I just want to
ask the other panelists if there some
remarks they want to say professor
Herman wanted to comment about something
I said earlier yes can is this thing
working
good well bill bill remarked quoting
hurt scarred he made the point that the
depressed defend themselves by saying
they must report what the president says
and he then said but the press does not
go on to say that we reporters think
this is a lot of hokum but actually the
the press when it does report what the
president says and tries to justify
reporting the president's remarks all by
themselves aren't really violating their
own fundamental principles the hope the
concept of objectivity and fairness says
that if there is a potentially
contestable claim and especially if they
have any suspicions that this has a
manipulative intent they're supposed to
quote get the other side they're
supposed to seek out experts and get
expert testimonies and that should be
that that that form of balance should be
given immediately and as I stressed too
if there's any question about the the
integrity of the news they should be
investigatively very zealous and
pointing these things up and coming back
fast so their rationale that they just
must report what Reagan says violates
their own principles you should not let
let that escape they are supposed to
present balanced views and when there's
questionable material they're supposed
to be seeking out the truth and looking
for experts and not just other officials
and and establishment experts so they
but they're systematically violating
their own principles of fairness and
objectivity when they take a Reagan
proposition on Libya present it and and
then and don't don't do anything about
it thank you